#hpfem-mpt

This is a MATLAB program for numerically computing the rank 2 magnetic polarizability tensor (MPT) using the hp-finite element method (hpfem) for different shaped objects. It is designed as an educational and research tool for engineers, mathematicians and physicists working both academia and industry and it is hoped those interested in characterising conducting permeable objects will find it useful.

The engineering prediction of H_0^{Measure} . (M H_0)^{Exciter} ) for the voltage perturbation in a single exciter, measure coil configuration when an object is placed in an alternating low frequency magnetic field has been confirmed by a rigorous mathematical analysis [2].  This involves an asymptotic expansion of the perturbed magnetic field in the presence of a conducting object as it’s size tends to zero for the eddy current approximation of Maxwell’s equations. Here H_0^{Exciter} is the background field generated by an exiting coil evaluated at the centre of the object, H_0^{Measure} is the corresponding magnetic field if a sensor coil acts as an exciter and M is the MPT. The low-cost description provided by an MPT offers significant advantages for the location and characterisation of objects in metal detection. Characterising object’s by their MPT coefficients can viewed as an inverse solution where a-priori knowledge about the targets has been applied.

The MPT characterises the shape, conductivity, permeability of conducting permeable object, is frequency dependent [1] and is independent of the object’s position. The rank 2 MPT is symmetric and has at most 6 independent complex coefficients. However, for objects with mirror or rotational symmetries the number of independent coefficients is smaller [1,2]. 

The provided program computes the MPT for a given object by solving 3 vectorial transmission problems simultaneously using hpfem [1,2]. This involves scaling the object and generating a mesh for the same shaped unit-sized conducting permeable object placed in a large non-conducting domain with the truncation domain set a large distance from the object. The domain needs to be discretised by an unstructured tetrahedral mesh, which should be done externally. Reading meshes generated from Netgen are currently supported.

The hpfem method uses a N\'ed\'elec (H(curl)) conforming hierarchic finite element basis [3]. This allows for the coarse meshes and the increasing of the polynomial degree to ensure convergence (p-refinement). In the case of smooth solutions, p-refinement leads to exponential convergence of the solution (and the MPT coefficients).

To solve the resulting 3 linear systems a pre-conditioned GMRES solver using a block-diagonal Jacobi preconditioner [4], built from different block of the hpfem basis, is employed and leads to rapid convergence of the solution for each problem.

Once the system is solved the MPT is computed and displayed in the command window.

The solver outputs a vtm and vtu files in order to allow visualisation of the solutions to the transmission problems using Paraview.

A detailed tutorial is in preparation.
 
#Installation

The Netgen mesh generator (https://sourceforge.net/projects/netgen-mesher/) and MATLAB (https://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html) (tested on version 2015b) are required. To visualise the solutions to the transmission problem Paraview (http://www.paraview.org) should be installed.

1. Save or clone the repository to your machine.

2. To extract the provided set of meshes for simple objects enter

meshextract

in the MATLAB command window, with the path set to the home directory of the program.

#Usage

The program is run by typing

main

in the MATLAB command window, with the path set to the home directory of the program. The polynomial degree and the different sample objects can selected by controlling the simple flags at the top of main.m. The program then computes the MPT and outputs vtm and vtu files for visualisation in Paraview. The vtm file references the vtu files and it is the vtm file that should be opened in Paraview.

A detailed tutorial is in preparation, which will explain how to setup problem files and meshes for other objects.

#Referencing
If you use this tool please acknowledge the work that has been put in to creating it by citing the following items in your bibliography

[1] P.D. Ledger, W.R.B. Lionheart, Understanding the Magnetic Polarizability Tensor. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics DOI:10.1109/TMAG.2015.2507169 (http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7350159/)

[2] P.D. Ledger, W.R.B. Lionheart, Characterizing the shape and material properties of hidden targets from magnetic induction data. IMA Journal of Applied Mathematics, DOI:10.1093/imamat/hxv015 (https://academic.oup.com/imamat/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/imamat/hxv015)

The underlying hpfem technology builds on the discretisation and preconditioner described in

[3] S. Sch\"oberl, S. Zaglmayr, High order N\'ed\'elec elements with local complete sequence propert. COMPEL: International Journal for computational and mathematics in Electrical and Electronic Engineering 24(2):374-384, 2005.

[4] P.D. Ledger, S. Zaglmayr hp-Finite element simulation of three-diemensional eddy current problems on multiply connected domains. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 199, 2386-3401, 2010.
#License 

The hpfem-mpt source code is released under the GNU general public license.


